(rustling)
Hello. Good. Turn on this thing one time,
please.
Hello?
Mm-hmm.
Good afternoon, sir. Mm-hmm.
Yeah, good afternoon. Sorry to get delayed by five minutes.
Yeah, good afternoon, sir.
Yeah, good afternoon.
Good
af- Good af-
Mm. So 45 students has logged
in. (computer mouse clicks)
Okay, so- Mm-hmm.
So I have shared you the last class about that, um, policy
evaluation.
Right? So-
(clears throat) Yeah.
I think most of you have executed on yourself
and you have (clicks tongue) got a feeling about what is
the, uh, mm, what the policy evaluation is doing,
right?
So today I will do it for, uh, your, uh,
frozen lake environment. So the formula
remains same.
Let me
open the PDF.
(mouse clicking)
Finding meeting contents.
Okay.
Okay. So today we'll, we'll do for
frozen lake thing. Okay? So let me just do a recap
of what is the exercise we're doing here.
(clears throat) So value, uh, that is
value function, that is, we write it as V of
S.
S is for any given state. This value function we are
going to evaluate,
this evaluation is happening iteratively.
That means, uh, at the re- at the iteration of K plus
one, the value function at the state of S is depending
on the value function already computed at the iteration
K that is given on the right-hand side.
Okay, so if S is the current state for which you want to evaluate the
value,
that value is dependent on the
next, uh, state, that is S
dashed.
And this S dashed
is coming as a result of your choice of the action of A,
and (sighs) the value obtained, previously obtained at the
step, um, at the iteration of K, in the state of S dashed, we are going to
utilize them for all the time. So this
value function relation will remain the same.
Today we are going to do it for frozen lake environment.
Sir, one question in that equation.
Hmm?
That, um, say for normally when we see, then we will
take the case of, I mean, state S, uh,
at the, uh, iteration K-
Mm-hmm.
... and state S dashed at an iteration K plus one.
I mean, normally th-this is how we see.
But here we are saying that, uh, iteration K plus
one, state S, and-
Mm-hmm.
... in the end we see that iteration K and state S
dashed.
Mm-hmm.
So, sir, somewhat counterintuitive, like future and
past.
Mm, hmm, hmm. Yes.
So, um, so that's why it's getting difficult,
sir, to follow. (laughs)
Okay.
So you have said it rightly-
Mm-hmm. ... it is count- counterintuitive, future-
Yes,
sir. ... and the past. So, uh, it is like this.
Uh,
how many steps are remaining for you to reach the goal?
That is denoted by this iteration, okay?
So if K plus one steps are remaining-
Uh-huh.
... currently you are at the state of S, okay?
So, uh, you take one action, so that means one time
step is lost, so you are remaining with K number of time step,
okay? So this K number of time step you are remaining.
So what are the possible states that you can go from the state of
small s? The possible states are denoted by S
dashed, okay?
Mm-hmm.
So you can be remaining in any one of the state, which is denoted
by S dashed.So when you are going to state of S dashed, how many
states are remaining? Only K number of states are remaining.
Mm-hmm.
So that value should be known to you beforehand in order to calculate
the value for the state of S when you have K plus
one time step remaining. Time step means you take
one, you take one decision.
Mm-hmm.
As a result, you go to next state, so you are remaining with one minus
time step remaining right now.
Hmm.
So it- that is why it is called sequential decision-making process.
At every sequence, you take a decision.
You go to a next state, and there also you take
one time step delay to take one
decision, okay?
Mm-hmm.
So that is what we call, uh, s- sequential.
Like any case of robot, m- basically, uh-
Okay.
... reinforcement learning is part of robotics, okay?
So any robot is moving in a floor, he is
moving from one tile to another tile at
every time step.
Hmm.
And he is
being fed with some kind of information.
So at every time step, he is making a move.
He is observing the environment again, and he will take a
decision.
Okay?
Okay, sir.
After we complete this value, uh, iteration and policy iteration-
Sure.
... I will show you where is the use case of this reinforcement learning in
large language model.
So you have to wait for some amount of time to
see that happens.
So today's task is how to do this value
evaluation, policy evaluation we call.
Policy evaluation is computing the value for remaining in every state,
okay? So we'll do this for this thing,
uh, frozen lake. I also have a, mm,
this thing, a
Python file
for showing you, okay? On that, I will do this
today. So let us do it by hand for
only one
state, fine?
So let me open that.
Okay, so this is today's
class.
Today's date is 6th?
Mm-hmm. Yes, sir.
Mm-hmm.
Okay, so today's task is called frozen lake policy
evaluation.
So...
So today's date is 6th
December,
so we are having four cross four grid, okay?
We are going to get a reward only...
The grid is I'm not drawing, it will take some time, so I'll not draw.
So here, the goal state is at the state of 15.
You are going to get reward only when you have transitioned to the goal
state. Otherwise, intermediate state has no reward.
However, if you have fallen into this hole, you are not going to get
any reward. Your game will be restarted, okay?
So 5, 7, 11, and 12, these are the state for
hole. So we are going to calculate the reward for state of 14,
okay? So I will draw that now.
The state of 14...
Let me draw a tree, okay? So this is the node for
state of 14. I'm going to take a
action.
So here, the action is basically, let's say, you
want to take a action on the right-hand side.
So you, you have taken action on the right-hand side with 0.33
probability, you will be going into the state in the right-hand
side. 90-degree angle, you will be going with
0.33 probability, and again, 90-degree angle, you'll be
going down. So these are the possibility, okay?
Under every direction of action you have chosen.
So in that case, we
have, let's say, we have taken
a dec- uh, draw it
correctly.
Say we have taken a a- action on
downside action, okay? This is the
action we have taken. What are the
next states that we can get into?
We can get into the state of... Uh, who is the
states near to your 14?
10, 15.
You have... Yeah, so you can go into 13, you can get into...
Now 10 is ruled out, so 13, 14, and 15,
okay? So your next states can be...
It can be... This is your action,
so it is called probability of
action
given the state of 14. We have taken the action to be
down. Let me write this in a separate,
mm, color.
So
this D is basically......
action we have chosen. D is equal to this,
okay? I'm not ... I'm erasing this
here. So you have taken an action to be D.
(sighs) So what are the next states
possible? The next states are-
13- ... next states- ... 14 and 15. Yes, right.
So from here, you have a bifurcation.
The state of 13,
state of 14,
state of 15.
Okay, so what are the probability to get into these states?
Each one of them, probability is 0, 1, 3,
3.
Okay. Now, once you have got into these
states, you have to calculate
the f- you, you want to calculate the value for being into this state,
okay? So you have landed up any one of these three state.
Now, what is the value already computed here that you need to know
beforehand?
So that is basically, let's say I want to calculate the st- uh,
starting of the game. v1 of 14. That is a value
function
when you have one timestamp remaining at the state of 14.
So here you need to know v0 of
13.
That is, you have zero timestamp left here.
This is zero timestamp
left.
Okay? These are the value that you need to know beforehand in order to calculate
the value of 14, okay? And the formula goes on like
this. So v1 of
14, if you want to calculate,
what is the probability of choosing
action given 14? What are the possible action
here? At the state of 14, your next state
is 15 here,
here 13, 15, here you have 10 I think, right?
The above state. Yes, sir. Above the 10.
Yes,
Uh-huh. So you have possibility of left, right, up, down,
everything. So your action set is belonging
to- (sighs)
... left, right,
up, down, all four possibility, okay?
Under every
member chosen from here, this state, you can
get into the next state of, with the probability
S dashed. S dashed given
A
at the state of 14. What are the next possibility of S
dashed? It is based on your action.
If it is down, then your next states are 13, 14,
15. If it is up, if it is up, okay, so from
10, from 14,
if you are choosing a action to be upside, you can land
into this state, this state or that state. 13, yeah.
Yeah, 10, 13 and 15. And 13. If you are choosing action to be
upside, okay? Oh, oh. Hmm. And here, as a choice of
taking one action from here, this is going to be any one of the
possible out of these three.
So that is S dashed. This summation will be happening over S dashed,
okay? This will be multiplied by the
reward, that is one-step reward, okay?
I'm not writing S comma A comma S. I am not writing it.
This is one-step reward, plus of gamma.
Gamma is a discount factor, then the value function
obtained
with one minus timestamp, I mean, the, and the remaining timestamp. Yes.
Yeah, so you have zero timestamp- Okay. ... remaining now.
Okay? This for the value of tender S
dashed. So this is the formula. Now if you
come, if you want to compute for v1 of
14,
under D, under down, under down action, it is
this. Okay? So let me now
open the other
possibility.
So this is for the down case. You
have
... It is for the
action is
upside, A given
14. Okay? This is... For
this, you will have
three more states. One will be 10,
one will be 14,
upside, right? So, 10-
Yes, sir. 14 and 15. 10-
Oh, no, 14 will never come. 13 will come in.
13, then 15.
Because there is no wall. There is no, there is no wall.
You are choosing action to be upside.
You may be falling to this state, you may be falling to that state.
There is no wall here.
Correct.
So either 10, 13 or 15.
Yes, sir.
So here, these are the states you are landing
into. Fine? Under every
possibility, like that you really keep on opening up all this possibility,
okay? So that is the value function for in the s- so let
me draw it so that you will have a clear picture.
Sir, then in the,
in the given the, in state of 14, so we'll have the, as per the direction of
the, uh, agent movement, so it can be up-
Ah.
... down, left and right.
Yes.
So we have, uh, our own set of three possibility values, right, sir?
Four possibility action.
So everything will be ... Yeah, four possibility.
So the, all this will be computed?
Yeah. Yes, yes. Yes, it will.
Okay, so then that will be the total value of function you have, but that given
state.
No, no, that's why I'm ... Let me complete the
drawing. In the meantime, you can keep
taking a screenshot here, okay?
So here, your action is, uh, this up and down
completed, so L, L is the
action-Probability
of choosing L given in the 14 state.
So now you have to open up from here, this
bifurcation, uh, trifurcation. So what are the
possible... You have taken L action.
So L action you have taken at the state of 14,
so 90 degree angle you may be hitting the wall, another 90
degree angle you'll be going the state in the-
So ten.
... uh, above. So here, yeah.
And 13.
Yeah, so here will be
13.
10, 14.
10,
14. If you hit the wall, you'll be remaining at the... here itself.
So these are the states. Next states, okay?
At every state you are are going to have a V0
for this state. Again, V0 for this
state. For every state you are going to have this, okay?
Now open up for this connection. Here
again it is
your right action you have chosen.
From here, trifurcation of all the states.
On the right-hand side action.
Okay.
If you have chosen right-hand side-
10,
14. ... you will maybe going here, you may be going here, you may be going down.
Yeah.
Okay? So in that case, this will not be there.
So what are the states here? One is 15 itself.
Hmm.
10.
Yeah, 15 itself, one state.
Yeah.
Another state is 14 itself.
Mm-hmm.
It is hitting the wall.
Another state is upside, that is 10.
10.
Okay?
Mm-hmm.
So you have
three into four, 12 states, okay? So that is what is coming
from here.
So here if you open it up, this
equation, now under L
action, one by one you choose, under L action you write the
whole summation over here.
Okay? That is L action
where? This, this part. So this part will be getting some
value from L. That value, you put it up
here. Okay? Then under R
action, under action R, you get some value from this
branch, this branch of tree. Compute the value, store it
here, like that. Every value that you store it up, just
do a summation of all of them. That's it.
Okay? You want me to write it like this, so it will be like
this. Let's say it is L you have chosen, L.
The action is L given in the
14. This summation, this will be
resulting
into...
is L. Where is the L drawn here, right?
What are the states here? 13, 10 and 14.
So probability, let's say, 13
given
L, 14. Multiplied by this, this is
going to be the
13 reward is zero plus gamma. What is
the V0 of 13? Everybody is to be initialized at a zero
iteration is going to be zero. So this multiplied by zero.
This plus
probability of
getting into the state of 10. 10
given L, 14.
This reward is again 10. This V of 10,
V0 of 10 is zero.
Yes.
So again, it will be multiplied by zero.
This plus
probability of
next state is 14 here.
Given, uh, L
and-
L, 14.
Yeah. L, 14. Add the
S- V0 of 14. V0 of 14 is always initialized to be zero
again. This is zero. So this is zero, zero,
here also zero. So under L action
this part is zero, this value is...
this branch is giving you zero. Only which value is going to be
non-zero? That is coming from here.
Transitioning to 15 state will give you some positive reward, so
you'll be getting some positive reward back here.
Under this, you do- okay, from here also you will get positive
reward. From here also you'll get positive reward.
And here also you will get a positive reward.
Okay? What are the value going to
be? So whenever you get into-
Zero. ... state of 15... No, for this case,
whenever you get into state of 15-
One,
reward, reward. ... you will get a one reward, okay?
So that R value will be one here in that case, so it will be in this summation,
wherever you have 15. Let's say it is...
next state is 15. You have taken this action is
U, upside action. Upside action
at the state of 14. This is the current state,
14. Okay? So your reward is one plus
of gamma multiplied by
V0 of 15. Okay? Because you have landed to
15 state. V0 of 15 is also initialized to zero.
So one multiplied by this probability.
What is this probability value?
0.33.
Yeah, 0.33, because this, this age is 0.33.
So 0.33 value you are getting here.
0.33. Okay? So
this is 0.33, this is 0.33, okay? If you do this
summation, it is going to be one. So it is not a plain summation.
This summation will be multiplied by the probability that
you have chosen this action. What is the probability of choosing
action of upside? It is one-fourth probability.
Uh-huh.
Because there are total four action possible.
Hmm.
Any one of choosing action is one-fourth.
So one-fourth multiplied by-
Okay.
So one-fourth multiplied by 0.33, plus again
one-fourth multiplied by
0.33, plus again one-fourth multiplied by
0.33. So total value is going to be-...
zero point three three multiplied by three,
four. That is the total value at the ra-...
at the iteration of one
for the state of 14. Okay. Like that, you have to calculate for
at iteration of one for 13.
For each and every state you compute for iteration one.
That is, you have taken only one timestamp of
your decision
given that you have started your game from any one of the 15
states. Okay. So like that, you are allowed to
take some limited number of timestamp.
You are living into any one of these 15 states.
Let me open your PDF. You are living
into any one of the 15 states, okay?
These are the whole state. You will not start your game from the whole state
because it is a terminal. You will never be able to come out of this whole
state. So (clears throat) if you start your game from any one of the
intermediate state, what is the value we are going to get?
That is what is our objective. So you calculate this at iteratively,
that means you are allowed to take a fixed number of
timestamp, okay. After that, your game will automatically restart
no matter whether you have reached your goal or you are
remaining in some non-terminal state. Suppose that...
It is called expiry value of your actions.
You are allowed to take, let's say 100 actions.
Within the 100 action, if you reach the goal, your game will
be, um, uh, over before 100, but
100 timestamp has expired, you have not reached the goal, your game will be again
restarted, okay.
So that value you have policy evaluation, this is the
manual way of doing. So let us
compute the value for s- state of 13
at iteration two, okay. So iteration two requires
the value to be precomputed for the neighboring
states. Eight will not be considered to be neighbor. This...
That is nine, 12 and 14. These values to be known
beforehand at iteration of one. So what are these values of iteration of one for
the neighboring states?
Let me write it
here.
So-
For teen is by zero-
... V1-
... except the V14, uh, location.
Yeah, except V14 everybody is zero?
Zero, yeah.
So this is zero
if S is less than equal to 13,
greater than equal to zero, okay. For only 14 it is, some positive value are
there. Now we want to calculate V2 of
S, uh, 13.
So the formula is same, choosing action
A
at the state of 13. This A
is having four possibilities;
left, right, up,
down.
Probability,
you have landed up into next state that is S dashed.
What are the S dashed possible
for the state of 13?
Go back to your picture and tell me.
14, um, um, nine
I guess.
Nine. Diagonal will not be coming. Nine and one more.
Tw-
Four.
12.
12. Uh, 13 will be there
because he will hit the wall.
Yeah, 13, yeah.
If you... Yeah, 13. 12 Will be there or not? Just check it out.
Left side it will come 12.
Yeah, left side it will come.
So, so there are four possibility, 14, 13, 12 and
nine.
Okay. 14, nine, 12 will be
there.
There are four possibilities.
Sir, uh, sorry to interrupt. One question here.
Uh-huh.
So I was just writing down. So when 14, we are moving to
right, so how it is hitting to the wall, sir?
Right is 15 no, then we will go up and sli- slip down to
14 because it is slippery
environment. Okay, I will just draw it here. I just... Yeah. So here is a 14 state.
Yes.
Here is a 15 state. What is state number here?
10, I think.
Yeah.
Uh,
it is 10, sir. Yeah, it is 10,
sir. Ten. Here it is 13, okay.
Yes, sir.
So you have... Let's say you have taken a action to be
right, zero point 33 probability you will be
taking this-
Yeah.
... the slippery movement, okay. You will be hitting the
wall.
Okay, sir.
Again, if you have chosen
action to be left with zero point 33 probability you will be hitting the wall again
here also.
If you have chosen this action,
under this action, you will not hit the wall. Okay.
Okay, sir.
Suppose you have chosen the action to be down, big arrow down.
You have chosen down action, as a result of that, definitely you're hitting
the wall
but there are some lucky cases, with zero point 33
probability you'll be taking this side, with zero point 13 you'll be taking this
side. Okay. So three times you'll be
hitting the wall under four possible set of action.
Yeah, got it, sir.
Okay, so now... Yeah. So your next state is S
dashed. What is our S comma A? Current state is
13. You are living in 13 state
and, uh, what is A? That is chosen from this
set, this.
Multiplied by R plus gamma V1
of S dashed.
Okay.Actually,
I'll go slow for the class because this is the most
important, uh, foundation brick.
If this is clear to you, these other things will not take
much time.
For those of you who might be expert, for them it might be boring.
Mm-hmm. Okay, so now
here. You choo- let's say you have chosen action
is L,
at the state of 13.
So that is L,
then-
12, eight, eight, 12 and 13.
Oh, sorry. A-
eight, eight, eight. But 12 is a hole, sir.
Huh?
12 is a hole.
Oh, 12 is a hole.
Yeah, okay, terminal state, so anyhow we'll see that.
No problem, we'll see. This
probability will be some positive probability, but this,
uh, I mean all of this will turn out to be zero only.
Okay. We'll write it, no problem. So
what are the possible states under the action of
L? Your S dashed-
The
Yeah, S dashed will be, can be 12.
It can be nine.
Nine and 13.
Uh, no. 12, right? Or 13, right. Correct.
Hitting the wall. Okay. These are the possibly state
under the L action, left side action.
Probability of S dashed given, what
is your current state? 13. What is the action you have chosen?
L. This multiplied by
R plus gamma, multiplied by V1 of
S dashed.
Okay. This plus,
you have to consider all possible action, right, so action will be
right. Given that, you are in the state of 13,
so what other S dashed possible? Under the right side
movement?
14, nine and 13.
13.
Yeah. So nine,
14,
13, okay. Then probability of S
dashed given, current state is 13, your
action is right side action, this.
Multiplied by R plus gamma, multiplied by
one timestamp remaining
at the state of S dashed. This plus, for
all possible you write them down, okay. I'm not writing it here.
There will be down action, there will be up action.
For all of them you have to get this.
Now let me evaluate for this alone.
I'll just erase this so that I need
space.
I bought this stylus for taking the online class
alone.
Very nice, sir.
This is from XP-PEN. This stylus is
from a Chinese company. It's an amazing company.
China are doing great job.
Although I'm not a fan of China, but I am amazed to
see their
progress. This company now is XP-PEN.
You can also buy if you are
interested to
present anything online by writing.
Also we'll evaluate this now. So I will not keep this,
uh, symbol of this thing.
Plus.
This evaluation is going to be, this probability of choosing this is one
fourth, okay. This now
write this over here for each and every cases.
One fourth
probability of S dashed, let's say is 12, is the
hole. 13 and L,
okay.
What is the reward you get? You will be getting a negative reward if you are
landing into hole, okay. Plus gamma
multiplied by
V1 of-
Hole.
Hole. So V1 of hole is always, uh, zero because we have got it from here,
okay.
This.
So state of 12 is covered here, then this
plus.
13.
No, let me write as the order is
given.
Nine, given
13, L. Currently we're in the 13 state, taking
the left hand... This will not be changing, okay. This argument will not change.
This multiplied by reward for going into the state of one, uh, one
sus- uh, I mean any intermediate reward is zero.
Yeah.
This gamma multiplied by
V1 of-
V1.
... of nine.
Nine.
Okay. Plus, for this state
now, probability of
13 given you are currently in the state of 13, we have
taken a left-hand side movement. What is the
reward for getting back to same state? Is zero.
Intermediate state is zero. Mar- gamma multiplied by
V1 of
13. Already we know for all this
condition, this is zero. This part is
zero. This part is
zero. This part is zero, but it is
minus one is a quantity. So what you are getting out
of this summation?What is this
probability? This probability value
is...
.33.
.33, yeah.
Yeah.
Yes.
.33 to minus one.
Yeah. So it is
0.33. So it is going to be
-0.33 divided
by 4. That is the value you are getting, okay?
Perfect.
While at the center. So never ignore any state which is just
beside to the whole state,
like that. Okay, so that is
how this will go on. So you can also calculate the V1, V2 of
12, and 12 is not, not required. V2,
V2. Then, uh, V2 of, uh, 9 also you can
calculate. All of them are going to be similar manner.
Okay.
Now I'll show you the Python example
notebook. The time is 12:41.
Your class is going to be up to one o'clock, right?
Yes, sir.
15 minutes is not sufficient, but let us see how far we can go.
Let me connect.
So the frozen lake environment is... You already know.
I am not explaining them, okay? So for every
state, this is a nested dictionary, you are going to define
it.
Look at, this is the frozen lake environment.
Under the state of zero, this is the state of zero, you can
take the action to be left, right,
up, down. For each and every action, what is
going to be your next state that is given here in this
topple? What is the probability of getting into that state that is given
here in the first entry? What is the reward you are going to get
here,
and whether the next state is a terminal state or
not? Okay.
Now look at, we'll just see a whole state.
Whole state, which is beside two, that, let's say
twelfth state, okay, because I have calculated one negative value is coming
up. I have a doubt whether I have done it, um,
correctly or not. So let me go and check with the state of 13.
Okay, so state of 13. Yeah. This
is the state of 13. Be- basically what I'm checking here, I
am having a doubt in my own mind. Although I have calculated, I've got a negative
value here, okay? But today morning only, I
did this program. I didn't see negative entry.
That's why I'm just rechecking. So that can be
possible. I have considered here a negative reward here.
But in the case of environment file, look at here, in the state of
13, I am taking a left-hand side movement, I am going to the state of 12,
okay? This is my state of 12 I am going.
What is the reward? Reward is zero.
Zero. Not one, minus one, right?
Not minus one. Okay. If you keep it to be minu- if you keep it
to be minus one, you will get a negative reward.
So a negative reward should not make you fearful factor,
because everything is depending on the environment and reward, okay?
We, we'll do that. I will show you, if you keep it a negative reward here, what
will happen to the value function and all. We'll show everything to you, okay?
So this is what our environment.
Then I do, redo the same thing. I don't have any separate
program. I am just changing the environment, running the same code that
I have shared to you last class. So this is the gym
environment. You should do it on your own.
Just you, uh, pip install this thing.
I will share you this file also. You just pip install gymnasium,
okay? And then import gym.
Yeah, import gym. Import gym as gym, okay?
After that, you don't have to write this environment on your own.
You just get it from OpenAI's gym
package.
I am using OpenAI's gym package, okay?
So this one, you do it, you will get this environment.
After that, you have declared what is a goal state, that is 15.
15 your goal state. I am reusing my old program.
That's why this one I have, uh, commented out.
We don't have two action. We have,
uh, how many action? The print pos- print policy and all this are all already code
shared to you. Okay. Print policy nothing but at every state, it will show you what
are the poss- what are the possible action available to you.
So I'm defining my, uh, policy here.
I have left, down, right and up. These are the four
action
initiated with zero, one, two, three, four. Zero, one, two, three, okay?
This is initiation. Then I'm defining this
lambda function
to encode that zero stands for right.
So zero stands for right to keep it, uh,
accumulate. Zero stands for right as a, this is not like
that. Pi means the policy. Under every state, you
say what action I'm going to take it.
Okay?
So zero, at the state of zero, you are taking right, right
side direction action. At the state of one, you are taking left side movement.
At the state of two, you are taking downside movement, okay?
So this policy has been printed here.
At the state of zero, you have taken right-hand side.
Look at this, this direction. Right?
Yeah, so this is matching the book.
In the PDF, this is the arrow-
Ah. ... which is, which we have. Okay.
Yes, yes, yes.
Okay.
You can cross that area.
Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
Okay, so this is the policy we are having.
Mm-hmm.
Now, if this is the policy, I want to evaluate the policy.
Evaluation means at every state, I want to print what is the value for me to
live in that particular state. Okay, so I have run this policy
evaluation.... then I do this print state value
function. This function will print me, given a particular state, what
is the value for me to live in that function?
After that you get this value. Look at
(laughs) print state value function, the same function I'm
using, which the code already is with
you. So at the state of zero, my value
is 0.11. In the state of
one, my value is 0.05. In the state of
two
it is
the same value as one. State of three, state of
four, 0.17 it has increased. Why does state of four?
State of four is just vertically down of zero.
(sniffs) Look at the environment, vertically down of zero.
So state four-
Oh.
... has more value.
You can tally with your PDF, okay? So s- look at state
four. Yeah, state four has more
value
than any one of the state which is one row above.
State five is a whole state, so this is not showing anything.
State six is 0.588, which is the same value as this
0.0588, the same value of two and three.
Okay? State of eight is having
0.23. Okay? And it is
rising. Nine is 2.029. 10 has
fallen down again, like that. Okay?
Sir, one doubt.
Hmm.
Virtually down is not allowed, right, in Project
Lake?
Vertically down means?
Uh, left/right it can go. Left/right and front it can go, right?
But, um, back is not-
From where? From where?
Eh-
Tell me any state here?
Down is possible. Left/right, up/down is possible from any
state.
Okay.
You are allowed to take only one step transition.
You will not do a half step and jump and jump by two state.
You are not allowed to do that.
Okay, sir.
(sighs) Okay.
So I have evaluated this. This is a random policy,
okay? This is a random policy. Look at, this is random
policy. This random policy is initialized here.
Random Pi. Okay? Now, I'll
show you the difference between a greedy policy and a
careful policy. Look at now, we have a greedy
policy.
This one I have run it just before the starting of class itself, so I'm not
re-running, okay? I'll share you this file.
So this is my go get policy, means the person is very greedy.
What he wants to do basically greedy man means, look at this
diagram.
Randomly generated policy.
Yeah, this one. Just below, sir, this one.
Yeah, below. Yeah. Go get it policy.
So go get it policy, what he wants to do, he will do like
this and go to the goal.
Fine? Look at, this is,
for him-
Yeah.
... it is a deterministic path. He doesn't want to take any risk.
He will... It is like this, when, uh,
um,
when, um, B Tech student is graduating, he
will try to take
any kind of appointment in any service industry
so that he get a job, okay? Or even though I have seen when
I was in software industry,
after we completed two and half years, all of my friends also have
joined with me, everybody wants to go on onsite, onsite, onsite.
Even the, it is like, it is becoming so many of
that, uh, you a- you already know all this story,
right? (laughs) I'm not retelling them.
There are some friends of me
who had onsite opportunity from one other service
industry. He has gone to the airport, and in the
airport there was an announcement that his permit has been canceled, he has to come
back. But since his boarding was done, he has boarded in the flight,
and he has gone to USA. And then at that point of time, the
situation was generally, I mean, it was generous, so they had retained him.
They didn't ask him to come back. But now it is not the case.
So that is a greedy mindset. Hmm.
So look at, this is the greedy policy.
The, we have a careful policy. Careful policy is he's
taking a very,
e- every step he is thinking and taking a step, okay?
So he's
taking this, uh, start, he's taking left-hand side, although he's, uh, hitting a
wall. Then he might be landing here or he might be landing
here as a result of slippery environment.
Even though he has landed up here, he is still hitting the wall.
He is not going to the sure shot next
state.
See, every time he's going to next state as a result of slippery
environment, he is landing af- he is sequentially changing one
state after another state, like that, like that, but his value
is higher. Means if you look at the start state value is
0.40 here, in the greedy policy it is
0.03.
So the start state (clears throat) value is lesser in the greedy policy.
It is more in the careful policy. Okay?
We will run it and show
you. So this is the greedy
policy. We have defined this greedy policy like
this. Then policy evaluation I am
running. Evaluate this policy, go get policy.
Then print the state value function.
Look at the state value function s- the initial state is having 0.03
here.
Then at the state of four it is 0.05, uh, here it is
0.02.
Okay. Uh,
now we have another policy called careful policy.
This careful policy. So careful policy is this one.
You're hitting the wall at a state of zero. Instead of one, hitting the wall.
Again, state of two, it is taking hitting the wall.
State of three, hitting the wall. Exactly this, this
thing I'm doing, okay? And
here, state of four, it is hitting the wall.
State of eight, it is taking a upside movement.
At a state of eight, he's taking upside movement.
He should have moved into this side, but he's taking upside
movement.
Okay, so under this policy, what is the value that we are
getting? Policy
evaluation. Policy
evaluation is resulting into... Look at this,
0.407 is the start state
value. Whereas your greedy
policy, the start state value is 0.03, okay?
So it is one of the conclusion from this today's
lecture
that
even though you have taken a sure shot movement that
the next state you are choosing, whichever state is near to your goal
state, that is a greedy policy. Under that, when the
policy is evaluating, that means you just keep on running for few
iteration and s- till the time each
of the state are not having any more increment of their value.
That is when we stop the iteration, okay?
So a greedy policy is not giving you higher value at the starting state itself.
So that is why I tell you all the time, this reinforcement learning is a
real time... It is not machine learning.
Reinforcement learning has been invented before machine learning.
This history goes back much earlier than machine learning. Okay.
The reinforcement learning is a real time,
uh, theory that has
enabled the transition from machine
learning to AI. Present
day, ChatGPT, whatever success it has brought is because of the
implementation of reinforcement learning into the LLM training model.
That I will tell you where it is coming up after the finishing up of this
policy and things. Okay.
So it is, again, one more hope. It is a hope.
Why should I say? Because even though you were
taking a greedy action, you are seeing the value is lesser than
the action, which is a, a careful
policy. So that is the same thing, man proposes, God
disposes,
and man disposes, God proposes. (sighs)
Okay. So you propose something,
you have seen failure coming up. So nature
is disposing
your proposal. But sometimes it may happen
that
you did not propose it, but nature has given to
you. All this happens because of uncertainty in the
environment. We don't have the full knowledge of the environment.
How the environment will react, we don't have any knowledge of
it. As a result, you are going to see some kind
of wonder things maybe coming up in your life also.
So, so here, the careful policy, right, um, the actions,
uh, are listed there. Uh, it's based on,
uh, how do we get, uh, the better probability, uh, based
on whatever the environment has configured? Is that how it's taken?
When you say careful policy, every step you need to think of what environment
configured with, uh, different probability and reward value, and then
they choose accordingly. Is that what you meant,
uh, careful policy means here?
Hmm. Hmm. Uh, careful policy means you are not taking this...
Nah, this one.
So careful policy means that you're really considering what the environment has,
uh-
Uh-huh.
... probabilities, but, uh, uh, no, uh, greedy policy means we are now looking at
the environment and the, the probabilities given and just looking at the
directions then.
Yeah.
The actions.
The direction that is, uh, closer to your goal
state.
Okay.
That is for greedy policy.
Okay, sir. Thanks.
So actually, it has written here. Look at, in this book.
This will converge after 546
iteration, whereas greedy policy will convert after
66 iteration. Okay. Since
it is taking a definitive path here, okay?
Or it may take this path.
Okay. So from the start states
itself, it has either taking this
path or it has taking this path. So it is not exploring all the
probability, and that is why it is converging much
lesser time.
As a result of less exploration, it is a greedy
thought, okay? Whereas here, he doesn't have a
predefined, uh, inclination,
so he will go on exploring each and every state.
After a long time, he will take a proper converging
decision.
So it is like he is taking a lot of hit and trial, this guy, careful
policy.
So he is giving more room for exploring the
world. Whereas greedy person, he will not give
any... He will not keep any room for exploring the world. He will...
He has prelearned from his seniors what makes
money.
He will go and follow the path of the senior's idea.
And then he might be getting entrapped
also.
Okay, fine. So this is the policy evaluation.
I have not got into the policy improvement yet....
that, next class onward, I will show you how to improve the policy.
That will be-
Excuse me, sir. I have a doubt, sir.
Hmm?
Sir, uh, actually, uh, all of this comes under action
evaluation, right? So which action gives maximum rewards?
W- why should we consider it as policy evaluation, sir?
Maybe I might be wrong, but, uh, I- I lack clarity in
this part. It- it would be better if you could explain me.
Okay, so you are telling that all of these are basically action,
choice of action, right?
Yes, sir.
So why should be it called as policy evaluation?
Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
So the na- terminology here used in the reinforcement
learning theories like this-
Hmm.
... choice of action for a particular state is called
policy.
Okay.
Okay? So, hmm,
what... Then why should it
call it as policy evaluation? The reason behind it is-
Hmm.
... so policy naming is basically originated from
what action you want to choose at a particular state. Okay?
Now, policy, that is called the naming of policy.
Then what is policy evaluation? Policy evaluation is basically
what is
the value for me to live in this particular state, no
matter which action I have taken under that
means. Whether you have taken left side direction action or right-hand side
direction, that is independent of that.
The policy evaluation says that if I want to live in this state, if I
want to start my game from this particular state, what is the
probability for me to get the success?
That is called policy evaluation. Okay?
Okay.
And next one's getting
into- So policy evaluation... Yes, sir.
So policy evaluation is inherently maximum reward,
right? There is no situation where we have to diminish the
rewards at any point of time, right?
Yeah. For every state, as the iteration goes on,
its value will be keep on increasing.
It will never go down.
Okay.
But as you said, maximization of reward,
okay?
Hmm.
So maximization of reward is the objective for every
state.
Hmm.
At some point of time, there will be no longer increment of the
values for every state.
Hmm.
Okay? So there are two kind of value.
One is called
value function. Another is called state action
value function.
Hmm.
The value function is basically if you are living in a particular
state, then what is the value for me to live
in that state? That is defined by what is the probability
that I will be getting eventual to goal state, okay?
Hmm.
Independent of the action I'm choosing from that state.
There is another definition of
value that is called state action value that is defined as
Q-function, okay? That is-
Hmm.
... a pair. Given a state at a particular action that I
have chosen, what is the value for it?
That is called state action pair value.
That, I have not taught so far to you.
Next class onward, we'll be getting into that, after we complete the value
improvement theory, okay?
Okay, sir. Got it.
In any way, value improvement theory requires that Q-function.
By the way, I will show you, this is that diagram that next class I'll be dealing
with it. That is called Q-function,
this one.
Okay, sir. Okay.
Here, Q-function, how Q-function can help us to improve
policy.
Okay.
This is the Q-function that we'll be dealing with it.
Okay, sir.
Okay. So I think if you don't have any que- question, then I can close the
class today.
Thank you, sir.
Yeah, thank you, sir.
Uh, one, uh, one small, uh, request, sir.
Hmm?
Can we have the Wednesday's summary, means, similar type
in LMS only, but extended time will be out to
Sunday?
Because some, uh, some of the colleagues get missed out.
For them also, it will get benefited.
So your ori- original plan, basically, where you had every
week-
Hmm.
... open for the week, right?
Thank
But last class, people have told that-
One or two people told, sir, but,
This will benefit everyone, I think, sir. I'm seeing that.
I'm getting requests like this also, through my classmates.
Uh, keep it, keep it for one week for the... That will be better, sir.
Instead of just the same class, same next day, is quite difficult,
sir.
Uh, yes, sir. The reason is, sir, the recordings are available on the ne- only on
the next day. So even it will be very difficult.
We are getting only one day to watch, sir.
If it is end of the week, that will be great.
Okay. Then last class, you said, you could have told me.
Uh, fine, I will-
Exactly.
... uh, I again have to tell my support team for
that. Let me share you this, uh, Python
file. One
minute.
(rustling)
Yeah, so let's come back and ............................
Let's see. Let me share this file.
Sir, also could you-
Sir, also could you share the notes also, handwritten notes that you made?
I mean, the one that you showed
..........................
(smacks lips) Not, not
The whiteboard, if you can upload it in the LMS as well, it will be great.
Yes, yes, sir. In LMS it will be great.
(clears throat)
And this, this Python files and all this, if you, uh,
also ask the T- support team to upload in that, so-
I have shared it to you in the chat window. Have you got
Sir, the problem is like, sometimes (clears throat) in a chat, it get lost.
So if it is... Uh, it's fine that we have this in the chat, but if it i- if
these artifacts are get uploaded-
Okay.
... uh, on the, you know, LMS portal-
Hmm.
... then in a f- future, then it will be a one-stop shop for
everything. That will be-
Okay. Fine, I will do that. I will tell my TA to upload this,
okay?
Ah, ha, that will be helpful. Sorry.
And you want this, uh, whiteboard sheet, right? This thing.
Uh, my-
Yes,
sir. ... file sheet, right?
Yes, sir.
Uh, okay. But there are like
generative AI course I'm teach- teaching also. That will be also be...
So you just discard them on your own, okay?
Hello.
Sure, sir.
Okay. Any more? Anything more?
That's it, sir. Thank you, sir.
So I hope you people are getting the main essence of this
course, right?
Yes, sir.
Because what happens for the working professional, teaching
email... I mean,
teaching deep learning becomes difficult.
Uh-huh.
So the RL is much more difficult. That's why I'm taking a very slow,
uh-
(sneezes)
... moment. (clicks mouse)
Understood, sir.
Thank you, sir.
Okay. Thank
you. So also for clarification, so there will be,
uh, two assignments every week and which will
have one-week time to submit, right?
No, no. Assignment, no. Only class note.
Uh, assignment meaning class notes.
Class note, yeah. Assignment, I have not given to you till
now.
S- so there will be two, uh, class notes-
Class note. Uh-huh.
... which we need to submit separately. Correct,
I think tod- today's class notes is not, still not opened, I think, sir.
So I will do one thing. I will keep it, uh, every Sunday, 9:00 PM,
the class note will be-
Yes.
Uploading time will be
expiring.
Yes.
It will be open from Wednesday onward, okay?
Yes, sir.
You have three days' time. You can upload it.
But don't upload two file in a week basis. Upload into one file.
Yes, sir.
A week basis.
Yeah, yeah.
Probably just, uh, each class have only one page.
Yes.
Summary of your notes, okay? So you are going to upload two
pages.
Yes.
Handwritten note, you upload it. Don't do any copy...
I mean, don't do anything from internet document.
You handwrite up, take a snapshot, uh, convert it into
a compress, and
upload as PDF. Two pages document, you do it.
One for each class, or maximum three pages document.
Yeah, so for last class, I uploaded two PDFs because I had missed
out uploading for the previous week.
Okay. You have just... You just mentioned the date of that content.
Yes, I have mentioned.
Mm-hmm. Oh, okay.
So another thing.
So most of... Yeah, Tilwin?
Yeah, sorry, sir. You, you go ahead, and then I'll come in.
No, no, I just wanted to know that whether you guys are having any
related project involvement in this topic or not.
In your, uh, in your company, it is difficult for, to work in
RL, but in your, what is called, your MTech project
that you
have told me. Yes, I have, sir.
You have?
Okay, fine. So in that case, you
can utilize this, uh, Python files that I'm sharing with you, okay?
Yeah, sure.
Hmm. Another person wanted to say.
Okay, so... (clears throat) Okay, this is Anirbud.
So actually, basically, well, we were, uh, you know, checking
those assignments in the RL. My just, uh, humble request to TAs, if
they can put things in order
in that, uh, you know, LMS portal. What happens, I will tell you.
Uh, that like, you know, some assignments are providing under- under
announcement section, something in the, in the...
It's just looking at the LMS, it's not very clear, means where the things are
where. Even if we see the link, uh, to- to
download a file, it is a one link club together.
It's to... Initially, I was not able to locate where is the
other link also. So if they put things in order
now, like the assignment one, on which date, on this. That will...
Just a small thing, but it helps anyone to understand, locate, looking at
the LMS portal. That's what my request to the TAs actually.
Okay.
Mm-hmm. Because-
So I will tell them to, um-
... I think yesterday, there were, there were a lot of, you know,
people, many of them are not getting, not very sure where the things
are, and those we were just trying to internally connect and see if anybody
under... So we can provide those
things also. I'm sorry to interrupt, Anirban. Sorry to interrupt. I'm Shraddha speaking.
Yeah.
Uh, as per the concern you said, in the announcement, there are no
attachments. And in the announcements-
(clears throat)
... we have just given the announcement, like Neha has given announcement regarding
the, um, class notes submission and regarding the quiz I
have given. And in the class notes and the resources, we have given all the
chapters, P- PDF what sir has shared us.
And in the quiz portal, we have only quiz. And in...
If you have a confusion regarding the class note submission, I'll inform Neha to
provide a correct link so that, uh, you don't get confused.
But, uh, I don't think that LMS is messy from my side.
I do- I, I, I- I think the LMS is messy for AI Systems Lab, I guess, Anirban.
It is not for RL, I
Oh, okay. Not for RL.
Thank
Not for AI Systems Lab. Sorry. It's my mistake there. Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, please, please, uh, check that.
Yeah,
If we have... We are maintaining that properly.
No, no, it's my mistake only. It was for AI Systems Lab and something I
just, uh, I, I missed it. Yeah, yeah, sure.
Okay, fine. But one more thing. Um, do we have
quiz? I mean, it's supposed to be- Every Sunday, huh?
Okay. I mean, it will be open from today. What time?
I'm not sure, but it will be open till-
Yeah, yeah.
... 9:00 PM next day.
Yes, sir. Saturday, always... Uh, I have mentioned in the rules also-
Mm-hmm. ... like in the announcement, it will be open from Saturday 6:30 PM-
Mm-hmm.
... to Sunday 6:30 PM.
Okay.
Uh, just a clarification. Now, uh, uh, the...
Even if it's the class on Wednesday, should we submit the, the notes
only on Sunday or even, uh, Wednesday also one note we can submit,
and Saturday class another note we can submit?
No, no, no, as I told-
Okay.
... one link, one file to be uploaded.
Okay, for both the, both the classes.
Uh, so you wait for the Saturday class.
Okay.
You get your, uh, online lecture, uh, recording, and then you take down
your note, upload them-
Mm-hmm.
... as and when you get time, but it should be done-
Close.
... before next day, I mean, before Sunday, 9:00 PM.
Okay, sir. Thank you.
So, but this week we have already uploaded for Wednesday's class,
so how do we do it for this week?
Oh, that is fine. We'll, uh, I will tell my
TA.
Mm-hmm.
So just for today's class, we need to upload for today, right?
No, no, yes, yes, yes.
Okay, sir.
So in your class note, you will write the date of the lecture
for that content.
Okay.
Yes, sir. All the instructions Neha has given, sir.
All the instructions Neha has given.
Oh. Okay, okay.
Yes,
sir. Actually, I have not logged into LMS portal.
I just share-
Okay,
... my documents, they do that.
Yes, sir. No, the student said that it is messy, so I gu- that is why I had to
interrupt, sir, because it is not messy.
Okay. Okay, okay. Thank you.
Sir, can we have the quiz starting, uh, after the class,
soon after the class, sir? Other than waiting till 10:00
PM? No, that, that we had experimented.
There are a lot of, uh, I mean,
uh, n- objection from your side, so I had made
it ca- kept it open till next day, 24 hours, right?
I mean, 9:00 PM.
Yes, sir. No, not, not ended. End time.
The start time, can we have it, uh, from 1:00 after, soon after the class?
Uh-
Uh, it is your wish Chetan. Whenever they upload, you can, uh, take the, uh,
test.
Correct. No, but it starts at 6:30 PM to- tonight, so then
we- What time does it end?
Hey, for them it, uh, for them it might take, uh, to prepare, right?
It will take time to prepare the question.
Yeah, because I finished the class like, um, my courses are
like this. Um, (clears throat) they have to
un- the TA has to also go through on their own of this, because
this, uh, no lecture availables for RL
course that they have been trained beforehand.
They are also like you-
Okay.
... that they have to take some amount of time.
Got that, sir. Thank you. Okay.
Uh, sir, one more request, sir. This assignment, sir, can it be extended till
11:59 instead of 9:00 PM? That will give us another additional time,
sir.
(laughs) No, uh, this is enough, I think.
Because they also have to wind up, they have to do the, uh,
evaluation thing.
No, no, not, not for quiz, sir. At least assignment.
Oh, assignment?
Yes, sir. So it's up to 9:00 PM,
right? I think he means notes, notes, sir. Note submission.
Notes, sir. Uh, no, it's not assignment, it is summary, class summary.
Yeah, yeah, for summary, class summary then.
Uh, don't get confused, and others will get confused.
Okay, okay, sorry, sorry. So for the class summary then.
Okay, yeah. If I, if I can do, I will, we will be announcing it. Okay?
I'm not... I have to talk to my TA
then, because they are also involved in some other courses too, right?
They get so many instructions and they forget what to be followed
up. So I will try to do that. Uh,
okay. Next class I will update you.
Okay. Thank you, sir. Thanks.
Sir, is it only manually written is accepted?
No text files are not accepted?
No, manually written.
Okay.
You write in a simple pen and paper, take a snapshot,
compress it, upload it as a PDF.
Okay. I mean, actually from past two weeks I have submitted, uh,
text file.
Okay. After this week, only you can do that.
Yeah, yeah, sure, sure.
Okay.
Thank you then.
Yeah, thank you, sir.
Thank you, sir.
Have a nice day, sir.
Okay. Have a good day ahead.
Thank
you, sir. There are a lot of classes. Uh, okay.
Yeah. Thank you, sir.
Thank you so much.
Okay.